The American Football Conference (AFC) is one of the two conferences of the National Football League (NFL), the highest professional level of American football in the United States. This conference and its counterpart, the National Football Conference (NFC), currently contain 16 teams each, making up the 32 teams of the NFL. Both conferences were created as part of the 1970 merger with the rival American Football League (AFL), with all ten of the former AFL teams and three NFL teams forming the AFC, and the remaining thirteen NFL clubs forming the NFC. A series of league expansions and division realignments have occurred since the merger, thus making the current total of 16 clubs in each conference.

Current teams
Since 2002, like the NFC, the AFC has 16 teams, organized into four divisions each with four teams: East, North, South and West.

 Division Team Location Stadium East Buffalo Bills Orchard Park, New York New Era Field Miami Dolphins Miami Gardens, Florida Hard Rock Stadium New England Patriots Foxborough, Massachusetts Gillette Stadium New York Jets East Rutherford, New Jersey MetLife Stadium North Baltimore Ravens Baltimore, Maryland M&T Bank Stadium Cincinnati Bengals Cincinnati, Ohio Paul Brown Stadium Cleveland Browns Cleveland, Ohio FirstEnergy Stadium Pittsburgh Steelers Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Heinz Field South Houston Texans Houston, Texas NRG Stadium Indianapolis Colts Indianapolis, Indiana Lucas Oil Stadium Jacksonville Jaguars Jacksonville, Florida TIAA Bank Field Tennessee Titans Nashville, Tennessee Nissan Stadium West Denver Broncos Denver, Colorado Broncos Stadium at Mile High Kansas City Chiefs Kansas City, Missouri Arrowhead Stadium Los Angeles Chargers Carson, California StubHub Center Oakland Raiders Oakland, California Oakland–Alameda County Coliseum

Season structure
 

   AFC East  AFC North  AFC South  AFC West 1st  Patriots  Steelers  Jaguars  Chiefs 2nd  Bills  Ravens  Titans  Chargers 3rd  Dolphins  Bengals  Colts  Raiders 4th  Jets  Browns  Texans  Broncos   NFC East  NFC North  NFC South  NFC West 1st EaglesPackers  Falcons  Seahawks 2nd CowboysLions  Buccaneers  Cardinals 3rd RedskinsVikings  Saints  Rams 4th GiantsBears  Panthers  49ers
This chart of the 2017 season standings displays an application of the NFL scheduling formula. The Patriots in 2017 (highlighted in green) finished in first place in the AFC East. Thus, in 2018, the Patriots will play two games against each of its division rivals (highlighted in light blue), one game against each team in the AFC South and NFC North (highlighted in yellow), and one game each against the first-place finishers in the AFC North and AFC West (highlighted in orange).
Currently, the thirteen opponents each team faces over the 16-game regular season schedule are set using a pre-determined formula:

Each AFC team plays the other teams in their respective division twice (home and away) during the regular season, in addition to 10 other games assigned to their schedule by the NFL. Two of these games are assigned on the basis of a particular team's final divisional standing from the previous season. The remaining 8 games are split between the roster of two other NFL divisions. This assignment shifts each year and will follow a standard cycle. Using the 2012 regular season schedule as an example, each team in the AFC West plays against every team in the AFC North and NFC South. In this way, non-divisional competition will be mostly among common opponents – the exception being the two games assigned based on the team's prior-season divisional standing.

At the end of each season, the winner of each division, in addition to the two remaining conference teams with the highest regular season records, proceed into the playoffs. These teams consist of the four division winners and the top two wild card teams. The AFC playoffs culminate in the AFC Championship Game with the winner receiving the Lamar Hunt Trophy. The AFC Champion then plays the NFC Champion in the Super Bowl.

History

thumb|right|150px|Original American Football Conference logo, based on the AFL logo with blue stars
Both the AFC and the NFC were created after the NFL merged with the American Football League (AFL) in 1970. The AFL began play in 1960 with eight teams, and added two more expansion clubs (the Miami Dolphins in 1966 and the Cincinnati Bengals in 1968) before the merger. In order to equalize the number of teams in each conference, three NFL teams that predated the AFL's launch (the Cleveland Browns, Pittsburgh Steelers, and the then-Baltimore Colts) joined the ten former AFL teams to form the AFC. The two AFL divisions AFL East and AFL West were more or less intact, while the Century Division, in which the Browns and the Steelers had played since 1967, was moved from the NFL to become the new AFC Central.

Since the merger, five expansion teams have joined the AFC and two have left, thus making the current total 16. When the Seattle Seahawks and the Tampa Bay Buccaneers joined the league in 1976, they were temporarily placed in the NFC and AFC respectively. This arrangement lasted for one season only before the two teams switched conferences. The Seahawks eventually returned to the NFC as a result of the 2002 realignment. The expansion Jacksonville Jaguars joined the AFC in 1995. There have been five teams that have relocated at least once. In 1984, the Baltimore Colts relocated to Indianapolis in 1984. In 1995, the Cleveland Browns had attempted to move to Baltimore; the resulting dispute between Cleveland and the team led to Modell establishing the Baltimore Ravens with the players and personnel from the Browns, while the Browns were placed in suspended operations before they were reinstated by the NFL. The Ravens were treated as an expansion team.

In California, the Oakland Raiders relocated to Los Angeles in 1982, and back to Oakland in 1995, while the San Diego Chargers moved to Los Angeles in 2017.

The Houston Oilers moved to Tennessee in 1997, where they were renamed the Tennessee Oilers. The team would change its name again, two years later, to the Tennessee Titans.

The NFL would again expand in 2002, adding the Houston Texans to the AFC.

Between 1995 and 2017, the AFC has sent less than half of the 16 AFC teams to the Super Bowl with only 7 of the 16 individual teams making it. New England Patriots (9 times), Denver Broncos (4 times), Pittsburgh Steelers (4 times), Baltimore Ravens (2 times), Indianapolis Colts (2 times), Oakland Raiders (1 time), and Tennessee Titans (1 time). By contrast, the NFC has sent 13 of the 16 NFC teams during that same time frame with only the Detroit Lions, Minnesota Vikings, and Washington Redskins missing out on an appearance in the Super Bowl. 15 of the last 17 AFC champions have started one of just three quarterbacks - Tom Brady, Peyton Manning, and Ben Roethlisberger - in the Super Bowl.

Logo
right|thumb|2nd American Football Conference logo used from 1970 to 2009|216x216px
The merged league created a new logo for the AFC that took elements of the old AFL logo, specifically the "A" and the six stars surrounding it. The AFC logo basically remained unchanged from 1970 to 2009. The 2010 NFL season introduced an updated AFC logo, with the most notable revision being the removal of two stars (leaving four representing the four divisions of the AFC), and moving the stars inside the letter, similar to the NFC logo.

References

Category:National Football League
Conference
Category:Sports organisations established in 1970