Alain Connes (; born 1 April 1947) is a French mathematician, currently Professor at the Collège de France, IHÉS, Ohio State University and Vanderbilt University. He was an Invited Professor at the Conservatoire national des arts et métiers (2000).Alain Connes, « Géométrie non-commutative », Université de tous les savoirs, 4, 175-190, Editions Odile Jacob, 2001.

Work
Alain Connes studies operator algebras. In his early work on von Neumann algebras in the 1970s, he succeeded in obtaining the almost complete classification of injective factors. He also formulated the Connes embedding problem. Following this, he made contributions in operator K-theory and index theory, which culminated in the Baum–Connes conjecture. He also introduced cyclic cohomology in the early 1980s as a first step in the study of noncommutative differential geometry. He was a member of Bourbaki..

Connes has applied his work in areas of mathematics and theoretical physics, including number theory, differential geometry and particle physics."The Geometer of Particle Physics"  Scientific American, 24 July 2006

Awards and honours

Connes was awarded the Fields Medal in 1982, the Crafoord Prize in 2001 and the gold medal of the CNRS in 2004.  He was an invited speaker at the ICM in 1974 at Vancouver and in 1986 at Berkeley and a plenary speaker at the ICM in 1978 at Helsinki. He is a member of the French Academy of Sciences and several foreign academies and societies, including the Danish Academy of Sciences, Norwegian Academy of Sciences, Russian Academy of Sciences, and US National Academy of Sciences.

Books
 Alain Connes and Matilde Marcolli, Noncommutative Geometry, Quantum Fields and Motives, Colloquium Publications, American Mathematical Society, 2007,  
 Alain Connes, Andre Lichnerowicz, and Marcel Paul Schutzenberger, Triangle of Thought, translated by Jennifer Gage, American Mathematical Society, 2001, 
 Jean-Pierre Changeux, and Alain Connes, Conversations on Mind, Matter, and Mathematics, translated by M. B. DeBevoise, Princeton University Press, 1998, 
 Alain Connes, Noncommutative Geometry, Academic Press, 1994, 

See also
 Bost–Connes system
 Cyclic homology
 Factor (functional analysis)
 Higgs boson
 C*-algebra
 M-theory
 Groupoid
Criticism of non-standard analysis

References

External links
 Alain Connes Official Web Site containing downloadable papers, and his book Non-commutative geometry, .
 
 Alain Connes' Standard Model
 An interview with Alain Connes and a discussion about it
 
 

Category:1947 births
Category:Living people
Category:20th-century French mathematicians
Category:Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences
Category:21st-century mathematicians
Category:Collège de France faculty
Category:Institute for Advanced Study visiting scholars
Category:Fields Medalists
Category:Mathematical analysts
Category:Differential geometers
Category:École Normale Supérieure alumni
Category:Vanderbilt University faculty
Category:Foreign Members of the Russian Academy of Sciences
Category:Members of the French Academy of Sciences
Category:Members of the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters
Category:Members of the Royal Danish Academy of Sciences and Letters
Category:Clay Research Award recipients
Category:Participants in the Les Houches Physics Summer School